What is now on in librarianship, I mean, studying librarianship, we can also study the history of the book.
It wasn't possible in the 70s.
When we took our exam?
No.
So you had to be studied just by yourself.
When you talk about the history of the book, of course, you're talking about what you can tell about history itself by studying books as artifacts.
or the history of the book as an object.
I'm curious what you mean by that.
Both ways.
Because there is a European discipline which is emerging, which has been emerging for the last 10 or 15 years in the United States, and it is called the history of the book.
Yeah, Robert Darrington.
Precisely.
Elizabeth Eisenberg also.
She wrote a wonderful book, but Darrington is the model right now.
Can you say that Voltaire and Rousseau were responsible for the French Revolution?
Exactly, that's the question he put.
And it's a very interesting... Luther, would you have had the Reformation without the printing press?
Obviously not.
So these are fascinating.
But you have the law in this country
from 1661 saying that, yeah, well, sorry.
No, you hear it again and you will hear it again and now you will remember it with my colleagues.
I have corroboration as well.
Yes, no, you will remember it.
You tell it in your way.
You see, we are parallel.
We are like sisters, twin sisters in a way.
But we have a different way to put it in a house, please.
Yeah, well, I would say that the National Library
comes because we have this law that every printer in the country should send one copy to the crown, to the king, to the palace.
And they have of course discovered that the printed word was dangerous.
So that you print, you can also spread a message.
But that's precisely why they established that law?
It was a law of censorship.
So it was for all the wrong reasons, in other words, as we would think.
Yeah, but we had then, we had a very young king.
Maybe I'm not making, you know, generally speaking, you'd think that you would deposit books because you want to preserve them, and you have a deposit, but really... No, no, no, it wasn't a message.
It was a control of what was printed.
But it turned out well for us, because we have now all these old prints.
Did they ever censor things that came in?
I mean, did they look at a book and say, no, this is bad?
And did they then prohibit the dissemination of those books?
I don't know.
We don't know that, because those books probably... Well, we don't know.
No, we don't know if it's...
was put here in the casser or if it was thrown out.
In the 18th century there were prohibited books but I know very little about it.
But there were prohibited books here as in France.
But I wondered did you keep a copy here and still order that these books not be distributed?
We don't know.
When I was in Leipzig the other day it was very interesting.
They took me to the top floor of the library there, and there they have, behind locked doors, the Exile Library.
These are books of Jewish authors that Goebbels ordered kept, but they banned them from being read and being distributed, but so that they were able to keep, of course the Germans keep records of everything, that they could keep a record, they kept the books.
So the books are still there.
Did Anton write about that, too?
Yes.
Isn't that interesting?
Yes, indeed.
But we don't know.
And we're not interested about Sweden.
And again, you know how I found this?
Totally unexpectedly.
Just the same way we found out right now about the Nobel Prize that I'm going to go visit today.
While I was looking, I was in Leipzig to see the machines.
And then they said, you want to come upstairs and see the books?
And I said, sure.
And then there's the, and they call it the Anne Frank.
Yeah.
Oh, they call it the Anne Frank, of course.
Yes, that's a good reason.
And they call it exile, though.
It's just a little,
euphemism for what it really is, the Exile Library.
It should be a little stronger than that, I think.
Indication, anyhow, in the name.
And then you know what?
There's a little yellow sticker on every book that says Exile.
And I took some photographs.
I can imagine.
Now, did you see our new National Library?
No, I haven't.
Because that's worthwhile to thank you.
Mr. Mays Bains came here yesterday, you see.
Just last night.
Last night, yeah.
And Nicholas might be arranging some of that stuff for me, too.
You will have a full day tomorrow.
This is what it looks like, you know, now.
It's been open since April.
Well, it has been... How far is it from here?
20 minutes walk.
But very close by taxi, right?
Very close, in five minutes by taxi.
But I mean, it's the old building from 1877.
Maybe I'll go this afternoon.
Yes.
You should call either.
I've got the whole day.
Wilson would be the right person.
Yes.
Won't he?
You ladies are wonderful, thank you.
Yes, we know.
And I want to take your pictures before I go, too.
Let me just say, I'll turn this off.
In the mountain, they have been putting dynamite into the mountains.
Oh, dynamite.
Invented by Mr. Nobel as a matter of fact.
That was his invention.
Yes, yes.
And the Nobel Prize.
That's right.
Now you have the connection.
Well, I don't think I need that.
But you know, it's fun.
It's fun.
And of course the Library of Congress in the United States.
So maybe half a dozen national libraries.
Shall I call them?
Antoine, of course.
Of course.
She shall call.
She shall call now.
to the Empress Amalia.
And she was, the Empress was married to the Emperor of Brazil, Dom Pedro II.
And while this little princess is hanging here, it was a niece to one of our queens, Queen Josephine.
And our Queen Josephine, who lived in the beginning of the 19th century,
she inherited her sister Amalia and her daughter Maria Amalia's books so they are here so she's here because she was a book woman in a way well in a way she read a lot of books
children books and sweet little youth books from her youth and she died in tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis.
You said her name was Marie-Emily?
Yes.
M-A-R-I-E.
Or Brazil.
What's that?
Marie-Emily.
Very nice.
You are the representative of these books, you're not just a librarian.
Yes, you are right.
Now, I think we have seen this now.
We have, yes, I think you should.
Yes.
Now we continue.
And these we can get later, right?
Yes.
So I can leave these here then as well?
Yes, you can leave it.
And then we bring you to another table.
Oh, these are beautiful.
I can see right off the bat.
Architecture.
Drawings.
Oh, look, Hader.
Oh, yes, he's using maps.
No, drawings of commerce vessels or ships.
Maritone.
Yes.
Ship architecture.
Ship architecture, and he is
It was a gift to Oscar II.
And this is a lovely picture of Stockholm.
And here you have the palace.
Here is the palace.
The library wing is not shown here.
It's just behind that house.
That's very nice.
Let me just bring that back a little bit right there.
Shall I hold it for you?
Actually, I think I got it.
It's fine.
Yes.
And it's... I like them at an angle, actually.
Yes, it's more interesting.
It's from the Baltic Sea.
And you know, at this time, in the middle of the 18th century, Sweden was quite rich.
We went to... I just want to write down the title.
Go ahead, you can continue.
Yes.
Okay.
Cectura navalis mercatoria.
Mercatoria is commercial ships.
It's not Mercator, I see.
I thought it was.
By Federico Chapman, right?
Yes.
Henrik Henrikus.
and what's here you have 1768 mdcclx that's right yes okay and then you have oh you know when the path was here some years ago
And where should they place all his bishops?
The Pope was in here?
The Pope was here.
In this very room?
No, he was upstairs in the king's apartment.
But the bishops, they thought, where are we going to place them?
Oh, they asked me to show them the library.
And I think they had a good time, and I showed them, well, they asked, oh, well, show us something, showcase, so...
And I showed them this book, Queen Christina.
And that must be her binding, right?
Her binding.
And it's Queen Christina with a C, right?
C-H.
Christina.
Well, that is the Queen Christina.
Exactly, living in the book.
Oh, she's the Lady Bibliophile.
Yes, the real Bibliophile.
She's in my book, Gentle Madness, by the way.
Oh, lovely.
Yes, I love Queen Christina.
Yes, and this is... The Bibliotheca Alessandra at the Vatican.
Yes, exactly.
Can you hear a little bit about what I'm talking about?
Well, we all find our paths meeting, don't we?
We do.
Yes, and this book, Gustav Adolf VI.
This is one of Queen Christina's books?
Yes, in her private library.
From the Cardinal Albergati.
How did this get left behind?
Well, it was, you know, all the manuscripts were put in.
The Pope got it, and it's in the Vatican Library.
But her books, she had a will, but after some hundred years, they have been sold.
Her library has been sold to different persons.
And it came to a Swedish collector, Viktor von Stedink, and he gave it to our late king on his 80th birthday.
This book here?
Yes, this book.
Which I'm taking a picture of right now.
So, do.
Go ahead, I'm still listening.
Be careful of the strings, it doesn't come into... And here's, the emblem here is
But do you call it a chef or with some wheat?
What do you call that?
Well, I look it up.
A chef of wheat.
So you will have it correct.
I didn't think of it.
What do you call it?
I will look it up.
A Queen Christina book.
That's very exciting to me.
A Queen Christina book is coming back to Stockholm.
But not now to the castle, but to the new built palace, in a way.
But this book was never, no, this book wasn't here because it's printed in 1664.
So she got it from the Cardinal Albergati in Rome.
But it came back here?
It was never here in the beginning.
I have to change.
Okay.
Because she left in 1654.
But nevertheless, it's a book of hers that came back.
Yes, in a way back to Sweden.
Yes.
And another book here that was a gift to Gustav Adolf.
Nothing special with it.
It's of Walter Scott.
Look at it, but it has a treasure.
It has a hidden treasure, this book.
It is?
Yes, it has a hidden treasure.
A hidden treasure.
I have to show you.
You'll have to show me because I don't want to.
No.
You look at it there.
Okay.
Oh my.
A forage, a forage painting.
Yes.
And it is a forage, and what is the scene?
It's from North Amberland, if you can read it.
You have seen this before, but we just have this one in this library.
It's Northamberland.
Northamberland.
Yes.
Is that hand painted, do you think?
Of course.
It's the only way to do it.
Because you have to have very... It's in from 1808.
Printed in Edinburgh.
Mr. Walter Scott.
Yes.
Mar... Mar...
tale of flattened field.
And we call this forage painting, I think, right?
Exactly.
Well, you have seen this before.
I've seen forage painting before, yes.
Yes.
And to have a fine forage painting, you have to bind it very well.
Like, in a way, it should feel like a brick.
And I think it's very sweet.
It's beautiful.
Yes, it's very sweet.
No, it won't.
It won't.
It's just for you to have a look.
And Gustav Adolf.
There's Gustav Adolf.
Adolf.
That's here.
You have it here.
Book plate.
Yes.
Aha, it has a life on its own.
And this book, Gustav Adolf bought in London.
And he was interested not so much to read old books, but a lovely binding.
He liked very much.
Otherwise, we are... Oh, look at this.
Yes, it's so beautiful.
It's the Book of Common Prayer.
Yes, and here you have the note.
So here you can read about this.
I think it's binding so lovely.
He went to antiquarians and so on.
So he bought this at a store?
Yes, he, yes.
The store is so, anyhow.
London, 1684.
It's a small a-dub.
So this is actually the bookseller's description.
Yes, exactly.
And he has saved it in his book.
I think it's good.
It's a good thing.
And he paid 60 pounds for it.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
And what year I wonder he was?
When he bought it, it doesn't say.
But that's a lot of money.
Yes.
When was he?
Because he was married to two English ladies.
His first wife was Princess Margaret of Connaught.
And when she died in 1920, he married Louise Battenberg, later Louise Mountbatten.
Lady Louise.
Could I get a Xerox of that?
Yes, certainly.
Instead of trying to write it down?
Yes.
They'd love this in Biblio.
I thought so, yes.
That's why I picked it out for your magazine.
Yes.
They would love that.
Because this is a book collector monarch right here.
Yes.
In a way, in a way.
He didn't send somebody to buy it.
No, he bought it.
And he thought enough to keep the discreet.
But we don't have many others, you see.
But you've got one.
Yes.
It shows that he cared.
He cared.
That we know.
And his years, you told me the years of his reign, right?
It was in 1950 till 1972.
1950.
So...
When he bought that, at some time within that range?
No, he could have, because he was born in 1882.
Oh, so it could have even been before he was king.
Oh, yes.
We don't know when.
As a king, he had no time, perhaps, but as a young man, he could start.
And we don't know the bookseller either, right?
No, we don't.
Yes, I think we do, because he saved that.
I think I have seen a little bit.
Let me look.
It's a beautiful little book.
I have a feeling.
I saw a little brown piece of the envelope.
Now, where is it?
But if it's not there, then we don't know, right?
There's no record to indicate.
No, no, no, it doesn't.
No, it's not here.
Because we saved everything.
Okay.
It's a nice little start again.
Just imagine Strindberg.
Yes, yes, just imagine Strindberg here in 1870.
Running up and down with moon stars, steps, looking for new books and...
to read and really have a fantastic material for his novels and theater places and so on.
And what do we call this area?
This is... It's the second gallery.
Or the middle gallery.
The bottom, the middle.
And it's to the north now.
And it's a kind of a magazine.
A store for a book.
You see, they are less beautiful.
in a way oh these are quite far done and we have the court calendar from russia in 1917 the last court calendar so oh look at that yes look at it beautiful yes
Well, you say these are the less striking ones, but there are still some rather beautiful books here, though.
Yes, never mind, these are quite nice.
Oh, well, you know, they want to give the most beautiful gift, not only a nice book, or interesting book, but it can be bound in a beautiful way.
Okay, so we are going up on another floor, actually.
Yes, now we are coming up to the upper gallery,
and we will enter what is what is that body of water out there this water is the mingling between the lake and the Baltic Sea it's a running water and now it's very calm but just a little some hundred meters away to the west
you have an enormous big lake so we're looking out on i'm just thinking of what these windows are looking out on on the lake or the volcanic sea and opposite us is the opera house they now give norma bellini and uh so what's the name this is this is where the lake what's the name of the lake i will put it on maybe you can write it
And you will have it, it's close to the carpet.
Really?
The same lake.
And here we have, well, fiction literature.
Fiction?
Yes, a lot of fiction for Oscar II.
Dreambird's work had been bought by his librarian.
And, of course, Oscar II was very upset with what Strindberg wrote about, you know.
But Strindberg wanted to upset everybody.
It was his idea.
He still got his book.
He took about his books, though.
Yes, yes.
He was interested.
So here's why... This is pretty remarkable.
Yes, and it's here where Strindberg remembered in a madman
Manifesto.
The first chapter.
This is going to be... No, it's too dark.
It must be... We'll try it.
Yeah, for your memory.
And here you have the Queen.
So here you have Queen Desiree above.
Her consort.
Above her husband.
Okay.
Yes.
So the literature here belonging to the queens are actually like pearls in a crown because they have picked their literature themselves.
They have had time to read their books.
The kings, of course, are also reading persons.
But they don't have so much time for it, unless you're time.
Now, these are the queen's books, and you say the consorts are down there?
Yes, and then the next king, after the provenance princess, Oscar I, and his queen, Josephine.
King Charles XV, after Oscar I,
but it's on these pages.
From our palace library.
That's excellent.
So I don't need to write that down.
And behind us we have a Vasa collection.
It was, and you know, our king was brought away, the son of Gustav III.
But he brought his father's books, and he bought books abroad when he was staying in Switzerland.
And it came back by a will here.
to the royal palace.
I will show you some of the books.
Okay.
This is quite remarkable.
It really is.
It belonged to Gustav III, and it says Faga.
H-A-G-A.
Exactly.
It was placed at the little palace, sir.
That's on the back of the binding.
Yes.
And what does that mean?
This.
Yes.
Haga is a name where he lived.
He had a little palace there for his summer visits.
Otherwise, he stayed here in Stockholm.
But he put that device on that.
Yes, because he had it placed there.
Of course, it's a long one.
A lexified.
Yes, a dictionary.
Latino.
Svecanum.
Latino, yeah.
In Swedish, Latin Swedish.
Excellent.
You see, the marvelous page is so beautifully printed.
What was the year on that?
Yes, look, trying to find out.
1790.
That's a very early dictionary, isn't it?
Quite early and a half for being here in this library.
I mean, dictionaries aren't all that old.
Well, perhaps.
You were right.
That's about when they were, I guess.
When did they start?
Well, Samuel Johnson was, you know, they was doing their dictionaries, but they're 18th century.
I don't think they come before that, did they?
I have not been thinking of them, actually.
I mean, here's the...
Well, the Swedish emblem, in a way, the small one, you know, with three crowns, belonged to Gustav III.
And we are so lucky.
And it belonged to Carl Gustav Tessin, one of the architecture of this library and this palace.
but it's mentioned.
And we are lucky here.
You see, the bookbinder hasn't cut the pages.
That's a little extraordinary.
You have so much room here.
But being...
Handle it like this.
It's a nicer binding in a way.
Easier to look at.
I think this is... We've done it.
You have an idea.
We've done it.
Yes, we have.
Here's your colleague.
Don't apologize.
You know, the acoustics here are wonderful.
Yes.
For the sake of my tape recorder, let us say we are up on the gallery, the balcony, and I heard you from the other part of the room say you've made an appointment for me.
Do they ever do musicals?
Certainly.
Benjamin Brinton has been here.
Of course, why not?
Yes, why not?
I'll be there.
Excellent.
That's marvelous.
That's good.
I will be able to write his name down before I leave.
Yes.
We will.
I'm feeling much better.
I think it's the adrenaline, the excitement.
I have drugged.
You have been drugged.
What do you call that?
Well, I've been drugged by books.
I'm fine.
You are fine?
Yep.
Yes, go.
This is all oak, right?
All oak.
The shelves are also oak shelves.
So they can carry these very heavy books bindings.
They have to be strong.
I will show you down there.
See, the architects knew they were making a library.
They weren't simply making a thing of beauty, they were making a thing of function.
Do I have it?
Oh, you have it.
So you found the words for it, really, really.
That's my job.
You say it's ridiculous.
We've been working here so long.
Yes.
And why is it ridiculous?
Well, I mean, if you want to make a career, you should always change an area where you change every now and then.
But this is so nice.
And it's very, I would feel like a mother leaving her children.
It's too nice.
Agreeable is probably the word.
Agreeable, yes.
Lovable.
Yes.
And I was just mentioning to your colleague, this was not just built for beauty.
There's actually a simplicity to it, but it was built for function.
The wide, carrying the big books down the stairs, you know, falling down.
What did you just say?
Yes, please.
We want some copies of the Biblio magazine so we can give it to the king and queen and our press department.
Stay there just the way you were with your arm like that.
Well, the background is lovely.
Yes, thank you.
So are you, by the way.
Well, you are your best.
That's nothing like a good background.
I love my daughter's little camera, but it doesn't recycle the way the professional one does.
All right, smile now.
I think we'll get it.
Yeah, that's a good picture.
Yes, and here, the view you see here is outside Copenhagen, and the fortress is Three Crowns.
Yes.
I'm sorry, are you saying this?
Okay, well, we are going to the Swedish Academy Library, and the Swedish Academy was...
made by our king, or founded by our king, Gustav III, in the 18th century.
And their library is housed in a house that also contains the stock market.
Really?
And the house was already there, because the academy was going to meet in a house with a room big enough and warm enough.
Would you hold this just for a second?
Just keep talking.
I want to take a picture of it.
Go ahead, you can keep talking.
Okay, this is the house, you know, the big house.
That's where we're going?
Yes, that's where we're going.
I'm sorry, you're talking about Bruce Valle III, who was founding the academy.
I can hold that for you.
But the librarian will probably tell you the story of the Swedish academy.
I've got a picture of that right there, that's beautiful.
Isn't that lovely?
Yes.
That says Sweden to me.
Okay.
The statue here is of Mr. Olofs, the scholar, or you could say the priest.
who made Reformation in this country.
The followers of Martin Luther King.
This right here?
Yes.
He was the one who brought Reformation into the country.
And Strindberg's first drama is called Mr. Olof.
That's him.
Right here.
I'm going to take a picture right here.
Shall I take a picture of you and him?
Would you mind?
Okay.
Let me shut this up.